Share Add Us On Google Add as a preferred source on Google SCOTTSDALE, AZ (AZFamily) — Scottsdale is keeping its Flock Safety license-plate readers in place for now with plans to revisit the issue in December. During a meeting Tuesday night, Scottsdale City Council heard from supporters and opponents of the Flock cameras as the technology has been scrutinized over recent misuse reports and privacy concerns , and other Arizona localities have ended use of the cameras. The council voted Tuesday night to have its staff draft an ordinance that would implement “safeguards” for the system and propose criminal penalties for any misuse. The proposed ordinance won’t be considered until a meeting on Dec. 1. The motion called for an independent audit of the city’s use of automated license plate recognition (ALPR) technology; a review of data retention and access; and a public website that would explain the city’s use of the system. The motion called for evaluating alternative vendors to Flock and reviewing the city’s current contract with the company, which ends in June 2028. During Tuesday’s meeting, Scottsdale Police Chief Joe LeDuc called ALPRs an “important public safety tool” and argued that the technology “saves lives.” “It helped find missing and endangered people. It helps us identify violent offenders, locate stolen vehicles, connect serial crimes, and solve cases that would otherwise go unsolved,” he said. The police chief noted that the cameras do not use facial recognition and that audits of the system have found “zero” misuse of the system. However, he acknowledged that “like any law enforcement tool,” ALPRs “can be misused.” “That’s exactly why policy, limiting access, retention limits, auditing and accountability all matter,” he added. Several members of the public voiced opposition to the Flock technology during Tuesday’s meeting. Scottsdale has 85 ALPR cameras citywide. Though the city has used ALPR technology since 2008, the current Flock system started in February 2023. The data is held for 185 days, unless it becomes part of an investigation. LeDuc applauded the council’s decision, saying in a statement that the council’s “action reflects a strong commitment to both protecting individual privacy and ensuring our police department has the tools necessary to keep Scottsdale one of the safest cities in the nation.” “We’ll bring back a proposed ordinance and information about vendor options, data protections and oversight so council and residents can evaluate how we move forward,” Scottsdale City Manager Greg Caton said in a statement. In an interview with Arizona’s Family last month, Scottsdale Mayor Lisa Borowsky acknowledged that city residents are “overwhelmingly” against the Flock cameras. Incidents of misuse have been reported in Apache Junction, Chandler and Goodyear. The misuse reports led Chandler and other Valley communities to end the use of Flock cameras , while other police departments like Apache Junction and Goodyear continue to use the systems, arguing that the technology helped in investigations. See a spelling or grammatical error in our story? Please click here to report it . Do you have a photo or video of a breaking news story? Send it to us here with a brief description. Copyright 2026 KTVK/KPHO. All rights reserved.