Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save After months of meetings, work sessions, public comments and a work session, the Florence City Council voted 3-2 to continue using Automatic License Plate Reader cameras, continue its current contract with Flock Safety, and make legal adjustments if changes are made to ALPR laws at the state level. The meeting began with about 40 people attending, many holding small signs opposed to the use of the cameras. As he has done several times during public meetings, Police Chief John Pitcher explained how the department uses the cameras. Pitcher said he’d spoken to Senator Floyd Prozanski, who’s among state legislators and others working on laws, guidelines and restrictions related to the cameras. Prozanki is also active in creating measures that would limit the powers of immigration officers and allow residents to sue for constitutional violations. The committee is looking at creating rules about who can access the camera data, requirements that camera data be encrypted, requirements that vendors who sell the cameras do not have the ability to see the data, and a yet to be determined maximum period of data retention in the system. “There was also a part of the legislative chair they were looking at that would have a civil penalty against agencies that don't follow the law, and also civil penalties against vendors that don't follow this law,” he said. Pitcher said the committee says it's close to presenting a bill to the state. FAQ and Answers Pitcher said Florence Police Department does regular audits of Flock camera searches conducted by its officers and Oregon State Police officers. A network audit looks at all agencies that have access to FPD cameras. He said he can then see the name of the agency, the reason for the inquiry and the related crime. “It doesn't mean that anything was picked up on our cameras,” he said. “I have talked to Flock, and they are looking at creating a way that agencies will know if their camera resulted in a hit that was put out by another agency.” He said two weekly audits occur, conducted by himself and his lieutenant. Pitcher said the most common questions he gets are about the number of cameras in Florence, who has liability for any misuse or mistakes related to them and what other law enforcement agencies can access them. Pitcher said Prozanski’s committee is considering 21 to 30 days of data retention before it’s deleted. Some law enforcement agencies are asking for 180 days, since some agencies hold the data longer. FPD currently has a 30-day storage policy. In response to a common question, Pitcher said Flock will accept liability for anything conducted by itself or its system. “We have liability for anything we do that's inappropriate, he said. “If another agency does something inappropriate, somehow with our equipment, they are liable.” He said others have asked what would happen if a Flock camera in Florence misreads a license plate and leads to the false arrest of a citizen. “That's a misunderstanding of how the system works," he said, adding that if another agency is using Florence's camera, that look-up will be related to a crime that occurred in their area, not here. Pitcher recalled an incident last year where a murder suspect was accidentally released from jail in Multnomah County. He said officers in that area used Flock to do a statewide search for that vehicle and its license plate. “They were not here to make an immediate arrest. They came down after they saw it, made contact with us and requested we help locate this murder suspect,” he said. “They did, and they found him, but again, any image that Flock gets is one piece of evidence in the case.” He said the images help determine probable cause of whether or not to make an arrest, but the images alone are not probable cause to do so. “We cannot use Flock as a confirmation to do anything,” he said. Pitcher explained that if a Flock search shows a reportedly stolen vehicle passes a camera, the captured image alone is not cause to pull it over and arrest the occupants. “If an officer gets behind [the car], we still have to use our law enforcement data systems, which are considerably more powerful, to confirm it’s a stolen vehicle, or not, before they take action.” Regarding outside agency sharing, Pitcher said his department only shares Flock data with in-state law enforcement agencies. He said that when Flock started, data was available to all law enforcement agencies, regardless of state laws. He said the system was later adjusted to suit state laws. Pitcher added that because of certain laws, local police departments cannot share data with federal law enforcement agencies. After answering some technical questions about the system, Pitcher said that while other Lane County agencies have canceled their Flock cameras, many other law enforcement agencies in Oregon still use them. He said Springfield Police Chief Jami Resch has expressed that she plans to use ALPR cameras, whether through Flock or another vendor. He noted that Eugene stopped using them after a camera that had been shut off turned itself back on for a maintenance alert. Public comment Speaker Phung Van said that while the council has received extensive public input that Flock is not a trustworthy company, that input has been ignored. “Flock says they don't sell data, but they sell subscriptions to data,” she said. “Flock says they don’t share data, but their partners like Amazon do.” Saying that data from the cameras is stored on Amazon’s AWS cloud, Van said the Department of Homeland Security and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) also contract with the AWS cloud and use the system to track and arrest people. Van said one Florence Police Flock audit was examined by Rob Wells, and found to show only 2 percent of searches were made by FPD, while the remaining 98 percent were made by outside agencies. She said the town of Winston made 1,495 searches of FPD’s Flock cameras, while FPD made 86 in the same time frame. She asserted that an investigation needs to be conducted into why a town 100 miles from Florence conducted so many searches, and that the city simply stop using the cameras. “These invasive flock cameras are an open window for all to see and to potentially exploit our families, friends and neighbors, she said. “We do not consent for our data to be collected or shared with other agencies. Having these Flock cameras does not enhance public safety.” Speaker Joe Matthews said contracting with Flock, when it has shared its data with ICE and others, does not protect communities but puts them at risk. “Florence is not Minneapolis, but it easily could be,” he said, asserting that DHS has shown they will act with disregard for local leadership, and Florence is not immune. “Your job as City Council members is to consult with one another and listen to the community and then make decisions that best represent the interests of everyone,” he said, noting the city had done so through public outreach. “But the other half of this equation is remembering that it’s OK to change your mind, especially if the evidence you see warrants it.” He questioned why the police department has such a need for cameras it once did fine without. Matthews called it common sense to remove the cameras from Florence. Maggie Bagon urged the council to end the City’s contract with Flock, which she said “is building a nationwide surveillance infrastructure.” She said mass surveillance always expands beyond its intended use. “It’s used by ICE to carry out the abusive and immoral removal programs,” she said. “It has also been used against people who seek abortions where it is illegal in the state.” She said the cameras are being used by data brokers and against legal protesters. She said the Electronic Frontier Foundation found 12 million searches related to political demonstrations and targeting specific activists. She said the system is being used to target specific people and immigrants, threaten reproductive rights. Speaker Justin Ludwig said that while people may choose to have cameras in their homes, the people of Florence also want, and deserve, to have the choice. “It’s their government,” he said. We want transparency, and a transparency portal doesn’t provide that, just because it’s named ‘transparency.’” He said police cannot confirm what happens to data after 30 days. He asked why a bidding process never took place with Flock. “Responsible law enforcement in Lane County has already thought this through,” he said, “and the state legislator is working on this. Our request to cancel Flock is not unreasonable, it’s following precedent.” He said a cancellation of the contract would also save the city subscription costs, liability and repair costs should a camera be damaged. He said that while officers can use Flock for 30 days, it cannot be verified what will happen to it after that. “Lowering the data retention to 72 hours doesn’t fix that,” Ludwig said, adding that news reports have said Flock was able to circumvent Sanctuary State laws. “Everyone wants public safety, and our police department can provide excellent public safety without relying on a vendor that has practices that have raised such widespread concern,” he said. “If you must keep ALPR technology, I urge you to immediately direct city staff to begin a robust bidding process, consider several different companies.” Staff noted that the city also received 38 public comments, which are available on the City website. Back to Council Councilor Sally Wantz made a motion to stop using Flock, saying, “I trust our police department completely- period, no question. However, DHS and ICE are untrustworthy. I don’t want to give any possibility of retrieving information from our cameras. It’s just a matter of time before they try to get into our Flock system. I don’t want to subject our citizens to that possibility. I wish to err on the side of caution and respectfully request all cameras be turned off immediately and we cancel our contract with Flock immediately.” Councilor Jo Beaudreau seconded the motion. Before a vote was taken, Council President Robert Carp said safety is the paramount concern of his decisions. “I do not take this issue lightly and have considered all the input and the research,” he said. “We have checks and balances in place for this safety tool. That’s what it is- simply a safety tool. People can spin this in any direction they care to. That only divides and hurts our community. I can see the value of enhanced safety for the community.” Councilor Beaudreau said Flock is a private company with no accountability. “We can’t be certain they follow laws,” she said. “They have horrendous security measures. You wouldn’t even have a bank account with them because you don’t need to authenticate yourself. Some users may have really great guidelines, and we have great police within our communities, but that doesn’t mean its the same in other jurisdictions.” Beaudreau said she was concerned that the city could be liable for what other jurisdictions do. “I have faith in our local police, I would like to make that clear,” she said. “Flock is only as good as the network it has, and many people have already abandoned this platform and this company. I am afraid for our tourists who won’t want to come visit. We are a tourist town, and we thrive on our guests here, and I would like to honor them.” Beaudreau said she’d spoken to people outside the area who don’t want to visit because of the cameras. “As an elected, I am here to serve you, my community,” she said. “I don’t want to be an enemy, and government works for us, and this is a way we can help work for each other. I believe that in voting against Flock, it’s not a vote against safety and our police…” After a murmur in the audience, Beaudreau said she’s concerned about issues Flock has had and understands that changes must be made when issues come up. “But this is absolutely egregious,” she said. “I was already very concerned about this in the beginning of voting this in, and things have drastically changed since a year ago when we were talking about this and had our draft camera working … With that information, it sounded fantastic. It was a really great, candy-coated story, and now things have really changed around the country. I really hope my fellow councilors will recognize that.” She said funding was also a concern, concluding, “I don’t think Flock is an appropriate choice for our community.” Councilor Mike Webb noted that the city recently approved an increase in its public safety fee to pay for police services. “Now we’re talking about removing one of the most efficient tools they have to save manpower,” he said. “There’s a lot of spin about Flock itself. There’s spin about Amazon Web Services, which is used by a lot of companies with a lot of very sensitive information. I think this has become way too political. I support continuing to keep the Flock cameras in action, and I think the locations for the cameras in the community at the perimeter of the community helps keep our people safe. I don’t think this takes anything away from tourism, unless you're considering tourism of the wrong kind. I think that having a camera safety system in a community like this is more important than you know. When you look at the prevalence of these cameras around the country, there are some 80,000 of them. They’re indicating that they help solve some 70,000 crimes a year, just Flock. Taking that tool away when the cost for a human trying to do the same thing is minimal, so I strongly support continuing the Flock system.” Mayor Rob Ward’s only comment was to vote no, along with Carp and Webb, thereby continuing the use of the cameras in Florence. Ward took a moment to regain order in the room as many attendees yelled and left the chambers. A motion was then made to the contrary. After some debate over the redundancy of voting to continue an already continuing contract, the opposite vote occurred. Webb, Carp and Ward voted to continue the contract with Flock Safety, but to adjust to any future changes made by the state legislature and to keep the 30-day data retention period. From the City According to a City release issued the day after the decision, since April 2024, the City of Florence has installed six total Flock Safety ALPR cameras, with the last two installed in January 2026. “ALPR cameras are a tool to help enhance public safety by giving real-time alerts on incidents such as Amber Alert, Silver Alert, Missing Person, Stolen Vehicle, and Stolen Plates. Florence Police Department is able to receive alerts and help identify suspects by entering license plates or descriptions of vehicles associated with criminal activity or endangered persons on a local level,” it read. “The system captures still images only of license plates and vehicle characteristics, and does not record video footage. The camera is used as one of the Police Department’s tools in solving and reducing property and violent crime, and not intended for minor traffic or parking violations.” More information about Florence Public Safety and the City’s Flock cameras can be found at https://www.ci.florence.or.us/161/Police . Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Save * Click Here to Place a Classified Ad * Online Poll Do you plan to vote in the next Florence City Council election? You voted: Yes, because it matters who will represent the residents of Florence. Probably, because I know some of the candidates Probably not, because I'm not that involved in local politics No, because it really doesn't matter Vote View Results Back Latest E-Edition The Siuslaw News' Latest E-Edition Latest E-Edition The Siuslaw News' Latest E-Edition View our latest E-Edition here! MORE Featured Articles Community Crisis responders recognized Community Florence Goes to the Dogs with the Inaugural Coastal Canine Classic News Dunes City to vote on Short Term Rental initiative +6 Community Family returns to car show after 20+ years Featured Articles Community Crisis responders recognized Community Florence Goes to the Dogs with the Inaugural Coastal Canine Classic News Dunes City to vote on Short Term Rental initiative +6 Community Family returns to car show after 20+ years +4 Community Beat the Wave helps residents be ready MORE FEATURED ARTICLES MORE Latest News News Social media offers little substitute for real-life emotional support, OSU research suggests News Merkley, Salinas, Oregon Lawmakers Introduce Grand Ronde Land Transfer Act Community Magnificent Humanity News Sheriff's Tip of the Week: Safety tips during hunting season Latest News News Social media offers little substitute for real-life emotional support, OSU research suggests News Merkley, Salinas, Oregon Lawmakers Introduce Grand Ronde Land Transfer Act Community Magnificent Humanity News Sheriff's Tip of the Week: Safety tips during hunting season